Please welcome to the virtual stage Dr. Fredericka Auto senior
lecturer of climate science at Imperial College of London. In
conversation with Bloomberg Greens Eric Roston. Hi everyone.
Thank you for attending what is to be a fascinating conversation
with a fascinating person. Dr. Frederica Otto is senior lecturer
at Imperial College London. And for the last several years she
has led a team that has time and time again answered the
fundamental question that a lot of people have about climate
change or really about the weather which is is climate change
behind it. So Dr. Otto thank you so much for joining us.
Just for starters why don't you share with us a little bit about
I don't know how do you how do you get into this to begin with.
You know if people were asking for years was climate change
involved in this or that weather event before you your team came
along and said yes yes yes maybe. And probably yes.
Yeah. Thank you very much for having me.
How do you think the main reason why I got into this is
precisely because people are constantly asking the question when
an extreme it can happen. What's the role of climate change. And
for a long time the reaction of scientists to that question was
a bit unsatisfactory. It was either we keep saying well we can't
attribute individual weather events but it might be the kind of
if the kind of event we expect to see more of or people would
say well we're living in a world where climate change is
happening. So obviously that affects the weather and the latter
is trivially true. But it doesn't tell you much. It doesn't
contain much information because it doesn't really answer the
question how and to what extent climate change affects the
weather. And
so therefore we we started
to try and answer that question so that
that was not just people with an agenda a political agenda
answering the question but also scientific evidence to put into
the discussion.
What are some of the most startling findings that you have
uncovered in the six years that world weather attribution has
been
has been Liv.
That's a difficult question because there are so some events and
one that probably is still in the memory of many people is the
heatwave in Canada and the western and north northern U.S. this
summer.
That was an event that would have been basically impossible to
occur without climate change. And we looked at the heatwave in
Siberia last year. That was also an event that where climate
change was a complete game changer and only made the event
possible. But
I think there are also there are other events where climate
change did play a smaller role or where or where it even didn't
really play a role at all. That were I think really important
studies for us to do so. One is on a drought in Sao Paolo that
happened in 2014 where we found that climate change did actually
not alter the likelihood of that event to occur but because of
an almost exponential increase in the water usage in the area
the impacts of that drought were dramatically more
dramatically worse than they would have they would have been ten
years earlier. And so
I think it's really.
Just how big a role the vulnerability and whether or not people
are informed or if there's early warning about the events. How
much of the role that plays in turning weather and into disaster
is something that
is often more shocking to me actually than the climate change
signal.
I want to
I want to take a second. And
so last month
Dr. Otto worked with us at Bloomberg Green on a profile of of
her and her team's work. And I wanted to give a sense in
transition here a second like this. This is a very small group
of people that you have organized. You have gone from a project
as an arm of a nonprofit in 2015 to basically a global media
phenomenon. The heat wave you mentioned in June I think got
something on the order of 30 500 articles written about it
newspaper articles around the world.
And and you and your your co-founder here John on Oldenburg were
made Time magazine's two of the most hundred two of 100 most
influential people in the world in September. I want people to
understand that background to understand the next thing I want
to say.
So I worked with Freddy. I worked with here on here Don excuse
me.
Who who suffered through the rise of this organization from
cancer for eight years
and struggled until his end in October when he passed away of
this disease. And I want to spend a few minutes just hearing you
speak about him.
Interviewing him interviewing you interviewing your colleagues
about him was an extremely moving and memorable experience and
I'd like everyone the audience to know who he was and what he
did to help you achieve this. This work you've been doing.
Yeah. Thank you. Thanks for giving me the opportunity to talk
about it. Yeah. Because
we were we were colleagues too. We started to do wild weather
attribution together. But when we started it I was I was a
postdoc who had written and published one academic paper. So I
didn't have a track record of actually
being able to pull pull something off in the academic world. And
still he.
He treated me and we have been partners. Yeah. Like a partner
from the start. We have been partners from the very start
despite him having 20 years more experience lots of academic
credit in climate science. And we had a very comparable lab.
Yeah.
Different skill sets but really the same goals. We both wanted
to answer the question that people actually ask of scientists.
So try to make signs as useful as as as we possibly can and
answer the question that we can answer but crucially not more.
And that was something that Young has always aimed at doing. And
also he didn't. Yeah. He didn't only wanted to get the science
right but really do the right thing. And before we started to
work together on what weather attribution he had developed a
platform that's called Climate Explorer that allows everyone in
the world even with the most crappy Internet connection to
access
all observational data from weather stations in the world that
that are shared publicly and all climate model data that is
available so that science is less
of a yet less exclusive endeavor. And that really is is
inclusive of people around the world people who
might have not training in programming and so on and that.
And that also allowed us to include in all our weather at home
studies always people from the area of the events that occurred.
And that was
and that was I think one of the main reasons why it was
successful because we didn't try and answer the question that
might be scientifically most attractive. But by working with the
Red Cross by always working with people in the area we tried to
understand what about what is it about this weather event that
actually people vulnerable to and then identify the role of of
climate change in that event. And yeah. Yeah. It was absolutely
passionate about this this work. He worked on it until until
days before his death. And in October we. Yeah the study. We
will have to finish the study. But I will. And
he.
Without him this would not have been possible because he he had
the tools he had the statistical skills and that put together
with my skill set with it which is more in interpreting the data
putting it into words really made us able to answer the
questions to go to the edge of the signs but not beyond. And an
answer in a way that people can understand.
Yeah I do. I really hope
people are hearing and we'll remember your comments remember
here Don because the limited time I knew him. It's just you know
science. It comes out over headlines. It's discussed by
politicians it's discussed in business it's discussed
everywhere. But there are people in here. Jon's case is really
extraordinary worm giving but wholly unsentimental
a science minded people who are behind this and providing
answers to questions that people have. Now one thing that was
very important to him I know is and you mentioned.
Is his weather database. Was he had a real interest in
democratizing data and making climate analysis of whether
something that anyone can do on any Internet connection anywhere
in the world. And so tell us a little bit about the
democratization of this work. Who will be able to in the near
term do this kind of work on extreme weather event.
And then what's next for world weather attribution as this
skillset becomes more broadly accessible.
So in theory really everyone can do these kind of studies
because what we don't do in well weather attribution is to wait
for our studies to be peer reviewed before we publish them
because we want the scientific evidence to be available when the
public and the media are discussing the role of climate change
in the event which is on timescales that the peer review process
can cannot possibly manage in academia. But too. But of course
peer review is crucially important for the quality of the
science and it's the fundamental basis of the scientific
methodology. And so not to
not to publish rubbish basically we have to try and mimic
the peer review process in an in a way that allows us to do
these studies quickly. And so what we do is every time we do a
study we write a scientific paper which is a relatively boring
read but it lays out in all detail what our assumptions which
data do we use. Why do we use it. And on the climate explorer.
So on this flat from that that you can build all the data is
available and all the the routines the statistical methods that
we use are available there to use to everyone can go and check.
Did we actually make a mistake. What what did we do. And of
course.
So in theory everyone can do this. The problem and the
bottleneck with well whether attribution is always that it's
very hard to do this if you have never done it before. And if
you don't have the expertise in climate science or art or
statistics or in some natural background and have actually
looked at extreme weather events because what you do in
attribution is bringing together observations and often very
messy data on on the ground on small locations with large scale
climate models. And both types of data are are very different
and need to be analyzed in very different ways but then still
need to answer the same question. And that's non-trivial. And
that takes some expertise. And so that is what what has always
been the bottleneck for a world without attribution because we
don't it's an initiative that we are doing because we find it
important.
But it's not one where we have funding or we have we have a
large
team of postdocs who can who can help well with the work. And so
we always work with people who volunteer their time. And there
is just a limited number of people around the world who have the
skill set and are able to drop everything and work with us for a
four week on or on the study. So one goal for well well that
attribution going forward is to put it on a bit more sustainable
feed
so that we are able to do to do studies
slightly less ad hoc and particularly
more in the global south because it's still always a lot easier
to find people with a heatwave in Canada for example immediately
a group of Canadian scientists said yes we really want to know
the answers. Here we are and we work with you. Whereas in most
people most scientists employed in the global south don't have
the mandate to do research. They have a mandate to teach and to
provide weather forecasts or other services. And they just don't
have the capacity to drop everything. And so that is something
which
will weather attribution will need to be able to fund in order
to to fill these these big gaps in the global south and our
understanding of how climate change affects whether.
Just in the last minute or two we have here since we're gathered
either actually or virtually at COP 26 in Glasgow. What
specifically for the diplomats engaged in the negotiations and
the many
groups and interests sort of swarming around them. What's the
message from world weather attribution to
people whose job it is this week to get their arms around
emissions and you know turn them off eventually.
Well I think a big message from it without attribution is that
the era of loss and damage has long gone. So climate change is
not something happening somewhere else in the future. But is is
killing people for our already now on a large scale. And that is
at one point two degree warming. So
we don't really want actually to imagine how that would be at a
three degree world or even in the 2.5 degree world which is sort
of around where current pledges are. Because for. For many for
the most vulnerable in our society it's already.
Unsustainable. And so
that means there is absolutely
no doubt that not that that not burning fossil fuels is
incredibly more cheap than continued to burn fossil fuels. But
also we need to address adaptation and loss and damage that is
happening already. It's not just a problem of the future.
Wise words thank you so much Doctor Otto for joining us. Anyone
interested in following up and I expect everyone will be world
weather attribution can be found at world weather attribution
dot org. There is a. All of the studies they've done are there
and then disassemble for the public formats. And at Bloomberg
Green you can read our recent profile of Dr. Otto. And just
today we published an overview of how they did their June
heatwave study in the US and Canada. So thank you again and
everyone and enjoy your time at copies. That's the right sign
off here. Thank you very much.